foreign
Illusions right I cannot make amends to
the man I killed I cannot make amends to
his family and
that still needs to be a North Star
right in my world in my life what I feel
like and so I can spend my time hating
myself or I could spend my time helping
to create a world where little kids
don't kill other little kids welcome to
the art of accomplishment where we
explore how deepening connection with
ourselves and others leads to creating
the life we want with enjoyment and ease
I'm Brett Kistler here today with my
co-host Joe Hudson foreign
[Music]
a lot of time on this podcast talking
about fear it's one of my favorite
topics and we've covered it from many
perspectives from parachuting off of
cliffs to having difficult conversations
in the boardroom and showing up
authentically in relationships but what
if the fear you're facing is the fear of
life imprisonment for murder
that's not something we've really
touched on in this podcast but you're in
luck because today Joe and I have the
pleasure of speaking with Emil De Weaver
who has been there and is here to tell
us all about it
that is the most interesting
introduction I have ever had and I've
had some good introduction
I was I was trying not to laugh too hard
or or haven't heard and then once you
laughed I was like all right good now we
get to we get to laugh at that that's
great
that's the beautiful thing about about
human laughter like when you come out of
the other end you can laugh and it does
feel good to laugh because you know what
you survived right and you know that
it's not a laughing matter
um but you know that like your world's a
better place for it and you can make the
world a better place for it so there's
still this joy in it so yeah let's laugh
at that yeah
yeah well all right let's dive into it I
dropped a little bit of a bomb there to
get our listeners hooked into the
episodes so I hope we have their
attention now and let's give you the
floor Emil tell us how you came to be
here today and what you'd like to tell
us about your journey with fear yeah
um those are all big questions I kind of
just start by just kind of
introducing the context behind your
introduction and that is you know since
I was 18 years old I was serving a life
sentence 67 years to life in prison uh
for murder and attempted murder at the
time it was basically a homeless kid on
the street I was in the uh I was selling
drugs so you know I was involved in like
uh drug wars in Oakland when Oakland was
definitively like the Oakland that you
read about in the news and feel like you
know maybe uncomfortable to walk the
streets at night starting interrupt what
years was that what what years were uh
1997 1998 in fact like uh what part of
Oakland
106th and MacArthur so like uh back then
it was called like the rolling 100 so it
was like I lived on 47th and San Leandro
in those years okay so you are I know I
know I mean I am familiar that many
years before 97 that like Oakland was
like one of the murder capitals of the
world uh oh yeah I mean Fourth of July
New Year's Eve there'd be bullets
landing on our on our rooftop
I mean I have a lot of visceral memories
from that time I mean and you're you're
part of the neighborhood was worse than
my part of that I mean my part of the
neighborhood was not good but it was
worse where you were at least everybody
in my neighborhood would say that that
where you lived was worse so yeah
that's where I come from I come from a
lot of different places but that's
another podcast and yeah so like I was
tried for murder I was convicted because
like I did it
um since this is 67 years to lay and my
relationship to fear were like I kind of
like think about my relationships to
fear in like three different stages and
that's like before I got arrested and
also sometime near after and that was
like you know I grew up in a in a hyper
masculine culture in a very abusive
household uh What Fear wasn't actually
allowed I put that in quotes because
there's no way to disallow fear like it
was definitionally a part of being a man
a strong man to not be afraid
and the problem for that for me was like
you know you know I have some muscles
now but I was a pretty small kid I was
always afraid I was the youngest of two
of like three of us boys or brothers and
an older sister but brothers were kind
of big and I was always afraid but I was
messaged that this wasn't okay so that
means I was also always ashamed and so I
was always hiding this and there was no
way that I could authentically show up
as myself in any situation because like
it felt like I was hiding this thing
that was very true about me that was
saying that there was something that was
wrong about me and I discovered at a
young age like the power of like anger
and rage to like cover fear I remember
there was this time my oldest brother
he's like four years older than me
and I have no chance in hell in like
standing up to him physically but he was
kind of just you know bullying me as
like big brothers do and like I reached
a limit not that like not that I had
like courage and any sense of the term I
had just really reached the limit and I
went into this rage and I threw this
deodorant at him uh we were in a hotel
room and it shattered against the uh he
jumped behind the bed and shouted
against the window and my dad who was a
pretty scary guy like he was like five
foot five but he was like a really scary
guy and he did not play right like I
would expect for him to skin my ass
alive or something like that right
but instead he had this look of Pride on
his face and he was like yeah I bet
you're leaving Mill alone now
and like from that moment I was like oh
this is way that I can one cover up
fear and cover up uh this sense of
inaccurate adequacy I have through anger
right and like outbursts and that was a
genuine Outburst right it's like I don't
feel like I've had many genuine
outbursts in my life I felt like after
that moment understanding that that was
a source of like power and safety in a
way that I could like not feel afraid
and so not feel the shame I would
manufacture anger and feed it and Stoke
it and Stoke it and Stoke it until I
could like draw drive myself to like
move through this fear
and so my earliest relationships to fear
was that of complete denial and rushing
through it right through and with anger
that of course ended and perhaps the
most traumatic moment of my life uh when
I killed a man which like let's be clear
it was much more traumatic for him and
his family but I'm like you know I'm
speaking for myself and like that's
something that
um you know 20 plus years later I don't
know that I've still recovered from
fully so I went to prison
holding this this like tragic act that I
committed
out of fear and uncontrolled anger
manufactured uh I have a memory in my so
when I was first out of college I taught
Head Start in the Hayes Valley projects
in San Francisco and I re and I remember
the culture of no fear right and I would
say it wasn't just with the masculine I
saw it very in the feminine of that
culture too there was very little room
for fear and I remember even at that age
with very little understanding asking
somebody about it you know saying like
nobody shows any fear here and they said
look if you show Fear your prey
so you're either predator or prey if you
show Fear your prey you don't show Fear
and I remember how much like that
viscerally hit me so I I just want to
say for the viewers to try to grok that
that helped me rock it so I'm hoping
that story helps grok it for other
people how important it was not to show
Fear so sorry to interrupt you were
saying uh and yeah if I could like you
know take a quick Divergent path real
quick to like respond to that story I'm
gonna tell you something interesting
that I discovered right
so I spent most of my life or most of my
even my juvenile life and like juvenile
facilities juvenile hall Youth Authority
uh like boot camps things like that and
of course I was always afraid there I
couldn't show it and so I had this like
pretend person that I was I was like
play acting hardcore like the hardest
method acting you have ever seen like I
have never liked to fight fighting
scares the [__] out of me but like no
one could ever know that and I had to be
able to fight on a dime right and so I
grew up in that environment pretending
that I had no fear pretending that I
like to fight pretending that I welcome
violence right yeah and like as the
system is kind of constructed the same
people I knew in juvenile hall I would
run into them in the county jail and I
ran into them in prison and we became
adults in our 30s and our 40s and we
kind of grew up and we grew out of that
and we changed our relationship to fear
and then we started to have
conversations with each other about our
child hood and it kind of come to find
out everyone was pretending everyone was
pretending in the name of survival
saying that like a fight don't do this
pretend I won't be able to survive
because other people are somehow
different than me I'm somehow different
because like I'm like this imposter in
this thing I'm like afraid all the time
I don't want to fight I don't want
everybody was thinking that and acting
on this pretend character that they
think it thought they had to be to be
safe not knowing we were all pretending
yeah I have to say this sounds a lot
like a lot of boardrooms that I have
been in
a whole bunch of people who are anxious
and scared who are doing everything they
can not to show it and not to react from
it and trying to have the bravado and
and they're scared the whole thing's
gonna go away yeah it's not not too
dissimilar that's amazing so you were at
the part of the story where you you had
this trauma you killed somebody and then
you went to jail which seems to me like
the number one place where you can't
show Fear like you were recreating this
reality so what happened when you got to
jail like what what occurred for you
there I feel like my relationship to
fear changed and I think it changed in
stages the first one was I mean what
lands is that traditional conception of
fear and courage like like courage isn't
the absence of fear it's like you know
doing the right thing in the face of
fear or functioning in the face of fear
that's why I ended up Landing but where
it actually started was you know the
reality of like waking up in the morning
right like because in the act you know
you can numb yourself right you can
force yourself through it that's its own
traumatic event to like force yourself
through like uh something that you know
you absolutely should not be doing
in the aftermath of that lives a lot of
self-loathing right so for me like I
couldn't have the same relationship to
fear of like you know I'm just gonna
work myself up into a rage and
recklessly like move through it and I'm
gonna deny it existed because I could
clearly see that that had resulted in
like the most horrible thing I've ever
done so that didn't quite quite work for
me anymore right what was that what was
it so there's obviously some people who
did that in jail and then they kept with
that technique right like they they're
like I learned that to overcome fear
with anger worked and then they I
created this heinous act and now I'm in
jail and I'm Gonna Keep on with that
strategy whereas you were like no I'm
not I can't do that strategy anymore
what do you think is the difference
between the people in jail who keep with
the strategy and the people in jail who
are like yeah that's not how I want to
be
I felt like an important part of that
answer to that question is luck yeah
there are a number of factors that
coalesce that created that like
impression for me right one was the
filling of utter disillusionment with my
with my value system that like with this
value system I have
this is where it has broadened me and it
brought me there while my while the
mother of my child was pregnant and so
my kid was born while I was on trial for
murder I saw my kid through like a glass
partition when they were born and I was
struck by the reality that this child is
going to grow up and one day someone's
gonna ask them what their father does
for a living
and I was like you know Junior High
School Dropout drug dealer by Society
standards like a murderer uh and when I
I say by society's standards because I
don't believe in identifying a person
based on the worst act they've ever
committed I did murder somebody I am not
a murderer right and I think that that
is a very important distinction so I
knew like you know I was picturing this
moment of when someone would ask my kid
this one day and I knew that you know
either they were gonna lie about it and
be ashamed or they were going to tell
the truth about it and be ashamed
but I knew that they were going to be
ashamed and I knew that with that shame
might come some measure of hating me and
I knew from my relationship with my
father like I had already sensed on a
level uh that she can't hate me without
hating herself and I said she but what I
mean is they because they're they're a
trans person but at the time I thought
of them in those gender terms and so I
felt like I had like mortally crippled
my kid in their first week of life I
felt like I had did I had just been
bored and I had failed them in every
conceivable way and that was a lot you
know my dad did a lot of things wrong
but from what he tried to do like
he had already instilled in me the value
that there was nothing more important in
this in this world than being a father
so that hit me really hard
and I was like in a state of sheer panic
and when that receded I began to realize
the one they're not quite old enough to
even know what a dad is or even what I
did or what prison is and so I felt like
I grabbed hold of that and I was like
you have
until the time they are old enough to
understand that to completely transform
Who You Are
right and if you
I had to turn I was like you know I'm
gonna get out of prison I'm going to
write my way out of prison with this
which is his own story that like
actually happened 21 years later
but I was like even if I don't succeed
at that if I can at least show them that
it's never too late to build something
it's never too late to turn around and
go in a different direction and create
something for yourself
then that that at least can be my gift
to them so I think that was the big
difference yeah that's huge I want to
double click on something that you said
which is about the being defined as the
worst thing that you've done and I'm
sure that there's somebody in who's
listening who's like wait you're not
allowed to let go of that shame of of
being a murderer you you're not allowed
to like choose the definition of who you
are you know something wrangles in
people when that happens and and at the
same time when I hear it I know so much
the truth of what you're saying which is
how we Define ourselves is how we end up
acting right if we think that we are
that our value is that we are smart then
we will go around acting like we're
smart maybe less likely to listen to
people more likely to be arrogant or if
we go around thinking oh we are
um more important than other people then
that's how we're going to act or if we
go around thinking we're less than other
people that's how we're going to act and
so to to take away the the
self-definition of murder to me is an
incredibly important thing because it it
prevents it from happening again it
allows you the freedom away from an
identity that's been put upon you or
that you put upon yourself either way
you get some freedom from it but that's
my interpretation of it and I'm
wondering what is your like what makes
it important for you to
to not be defined that way like what's
the Practical implication of that
yeah I mean I resonate with a lot of
what you're saying and I feel like
um my commitment to not being defined as
a murderer functions on on three levels
and I'll start with I'll start with
something close to the one you offered I
think that one of the more valuable
things that happened to me while I was
in prison is I became a writer and I
became a father
and those two things became my identity
to the point where like I would
literally have conversations with myself
and others especially when it came to
prison rules and prison politics like
you know you know you got to do this
thing those are the rules of prison and
that that identity as a father and that
identity as a writer gave me the actual
stretches like nah [__] that [__] no I
know those were prison rules and I'm not
gonna live like I'm in prison I refuse
to live like I'm in prison that was not
moral courage that was like I needed
that to be sane I needed that to feel
like I had a chance of one day going
home and being a father to my kid and I
had resolved Within Myself That
I'm not really super clear about how I'm
gonna get out of prison because you
gotta understand when I was when I got
sentenced to 67 years to life in
California but tough on crime meant in
California was that like there were
people who'd been in prison with five
years to life when I went to prison who
had been in prison for 20 years and they
hadn't killed anybody right right like
the pro the grant rate of life or Parole
in California when I was convicted was
like maybe less than one percent right
it was definitely less than four percent
and if the people who were granted
parole the governors would revoke 80 of
them so less than one up here percent of
people were found suitable who had life
sentences and of that less than one
percent 80 to 90 percent of them had it
revoked by the governor that's what
tough on crime meant in California
and so I was very reasonable for me to
feel like I'm not quite sure how this is
gonna happen right but
I do know that if it is gonna happen I
gotta be ready for it if it is gonna
happen I've gotta behave in a way that
makes that possible
and so those two identities help me to
resist prison politics because I became
something more than a than a prisoner or
a criminal or this identity that you say
that well if you're this then like
that's what that's what you act like the
thing that I want to like share with the
people is like how dare you right is
that look it's not a place I came to
overnight right like I wasn't 20 years
old talking about like I'm not a
murderer right I wasn't even 30 years
old talking about I'm not a murderer
right I'm 42 and 40 I'm like 43 years
old and it took me a long time to come
to a place
or I could one forgive myself and to
recognize that hating myself
was not the answer to doing a heinous
act and in fact was a bit of a diversion
in the scapegoat because you know I know
a lot of people spend a lot of time
feeling guilty about things and there's
a way in which we can become comfortable
in that this is like my punishment this
is my Penance see what I'm saying
feeling like [__] and and saying that
I'm not [__] right but what does it look
like to actually try to make amends I am
under no Illusions right I cannot make
amends to the man I killed I cannot make
amends to his family and
that still needs to be a North Star
right in my world in my life what I feel
like and so I can spend my time hating
myself or I could spend my time helping
to create a world where little kids
don't kill other little kids
and that requires a different
orientation that's why it's very
important to me and you know I get it I
get why you would say bro who the [__]
are you to say I'm not a murderer or
don't call me a murderer right I get it
man I get it but I respectfully disagree
with you and I say that you know if you
like there's the tendency to feel like
you're trying to get over right or like
you know uh you know you're kind of
that's real that's quite convenient
email you don't consider yourself a
murderer right
and I gotta say like that's for the
proverbial you to hold that's not for me
to Hope I feel really solid about my own
Integrity what I love about it is just
the simple that Vision you just drew
like to me was amazing because what it
says is
if you want to be the person who helps
little kids not kill other little kids
defining yourself as a murderer makes
that a lot less likely than if you have
actually learned to love yourself learn
to forgive yourself and overcome that
limiting identity
that and that's just it's just true you
know people who who feel that about
themselves and you're still hating
themselves in that way it's it's very
unlikely that they're going to make a
difference in the way that you want to
yeah so beautifully said I'm jumping in
here now having been off of most of this
conversation due to Wi-Fi issues but
there's something really there that I
like is that there's it's not that
you're like bypassing the identity of a
murderer that what that's something that
you've done it's like in in some sense
teaching kids not to murder involves
being hey look I am somebody who is
murdered I am in that regard a murderer
and that's not the only thing I am that
doesn't entirely Define me there's still
freedom to be had in who I am and how I
show up in the world regardless of what
I've done in my past
you know it's not this oh I'm not a
murderer that was just that wasn't even
me that was just some other some other
thing that I'm dissociated from and
don't hold me accountable for those
actions it's just yeah I am all of me
I'm all of my actions and I am
everything
beyond that as well yeah absolutely this
isn't a conversation about like I'm not
accountable for killing a man I am
accountable for killing a man I will
always be accountable for killing a man
whatever the consequences of that are
whether that's someone killing me one
day because they feel like you killed
this person who was important to me like
for me that's like that can happen those
are kind of the consequences of killing
somebody so like that's like you know
you got to live with that but like take
a different parallel take someone who's
not me right there's this practice in uh
in prison in the name of accountability
of like always leading with like this is
the crime I committed and I'm sorry
right and I can see why in a world where
people are struggling to even come to
terms with like I did a horrible thing
right I can see why someone could be
like we need this extreme practice in
order to assure ourselves that this
person is actually filling remorseful
for this thing they did but I think that
like goes off the track because who do
you know who in this world do you know
who introduces themselves with the worst
thing they've ever done you don't
there's only a certain I'll say classic
people that we expect to do that right
yeah
and and if you define Yourself by like
if you're with the things that we're
ashamed of are the things that we
recreate in our lives and so I think
it's great it's like where where do you
allow the empowerment of accountability
to be there without the
the recursive nature of shame how do you
allow someone to like be fully
accountable feel sorry forgive
themselves love themselves get over it
and when does somebody's need societies
need prisons need for you to feel shame
actually get in the way of that I think
is is the thing that I imagine you've
been wrestling with for a long time
there's one other thing I've got to say
you said something about prison politics
in there that I just have to say because
we have a lot of professionals listening
to this it's
you were talking about how I am not
going to be I'm not going to do prison
politics because if I do if I if I
follow the rules of this prison I will
do be defined that way and I and I can't
do that because then I won't be able to
be a dad then I won't be able to be
um a writer in the the things that I
want to be in this world I just want to
know if you are at right now at home and
you are in an office and you're playing
office Politics the same is true for you
if you are in that office and you are
obeying rules that don't work for you
it is stopping you from being the father
the mother the person that you want to
be and if it's possible for a man to not
play by the politics of prison
it's definitely possible for you not to
play by the politics of some office in
Silicon Valley
so I just want I needed to point that
out there because that is a truth that I
see so many people wrestle with and
never really get the kind of clarity on
that you did that is such a powerful
parallel and
um I just want to know if we have time
for one more digression
we do I talked to people about solitary
confinement in prison sometimes right
and like most people can see like I mean
the science backs are this like one of
the worst forms of of torture that are
available to humans and so most people
can see the problem with solitary
confinement but what I'd like them to
understand I was like you know it's a
different scale
but solitary confinement is not
different from prison it's just like
more severe than the general conditions
of prison and the thing that I would say
that would link to what you said is much
of what's happening in prison which is
why I'm an abolitionist right because I
think it's actually what the world needs
it's what Society needs right much of
what happens in prison is paralleled
also in society in workplaces like that
think about prison as a mechanism of
disposability
and then think about how many people
feel in an office something really funny
like you know when you go to prison like
you know this that's a lot of trauma and
[__] anyone who leaves prison after 21
years needs some therapy they need some
help right and like I have all kinds of
therapists different kinds of therapists
from like couples therapists to
therapists to somatic generative somatic
therapists like sex therapists like I
need them all right but something funny
that I have found now I know a lot of
people in a lot of different circles
whether in Tech whether in philanthropy
whether in the non-profit everyone is
trying hard to heal from trauma in their
life and I'm like wait
and that like it's different details but
there's something very similar about my
healing journey and the healing journeys
of many people around me who have seen
nothing of like what I have seen and
that tells me something it's like why is
that why we're like how is that so right
and that's because these things are
parallel these are like this these
systemic issues that we're talking about
like they infect all of our institutions
whether it's a corporate office whether
it's College whether it's law school
whether it's prison and what you can
learn from what's wrong with prison is
something you can actually learn about
what's wrong with the society we live in
when I was in my 20s and early 30s I was
in this men's group and
we would get together every Wednesday
for about three hours and we would talk
about our Journeys our healing Journeys
our spiritual Journeys and I remember
there was this woman who wrote um
something called The Vagina Monologues I
don't I can't remember her name but she
had this PBS special that was called
what I want my words to say to you
and in it she she basically took women
in Maximum Security Prison and one of
them was famous even I think the woman
who like cut off the Johnson of one of
her whoever boyfriends or something
Babbitt or I can't remember but
something like that right and she was
doing the work with them in this prison
and they were sharing these stories and
I remember going
these women who have most of the
murderers and now I'm thinking about the
way that I just said that most of them
had committed murder and they were going
through the same stuff we were going
through like their stories
were a little bit different but their
Journeys their healing Journey it was
all the same it would there and I
remember just being blown away by it it
shook me that there was really no
difference between what they were doing
and what we were doing
yeah and I remember like that that
moment for me was one of the more
profound moments of that year was just
like oh yeah this is this we are all in
this together
yeah okay so we're on your first
relationship with fear is now changing
into your second because at the
beginning you were like there's three
your fear had kind of three different
steps to it the first one was overcome
it and make it violent and so you don't
have to feel it and then you're in
prison and it's changing
to like the first thing but
a place of Courage the act of you feel
fear but you're gonna do the thing you
know to be right you might be wrong
about that but you're gonna do the thing
you know to be right or believe to be
right or at least try to do it for me it
was just like you know I was rooted in a
deep sense of self-loathing so I didn't
really care about my life
so it was like I'm not gonna do this
other thing and I'm gonna be afraid but
like you know I'm not go I'm going to
like steal do the right thing and if
that doesn't work out and someone kills
me okay I mean that's that's that's okay
like I I deserve it right you know I
killed a man so like you know someone
should kill me and so I've never heard
that that one's blowing my mind like
what's interesting is that the there's a
freedom in what you've you found a
freedom that was basically like
I deserve it which allowed you to be
Fearless that just blows my mind a bit
what an interesting like way to turn
guilt into Freedom like to turn shame
and guilt into Freedom fascinating yeah
and and it was like a doorway to
accountability I wouldn't Advocate that
like that's the healthy way to deal with
your guilt right that's what I mean by I
got lucky there's a way in which like
the things that were happening for me
coalesced in a way that allowed me to it
gave me the space and the time to help
myself and to expand my imagination
because I wasn't doing the right thing
exactly for the right reasons but I was
doing the right thing and that showed me
that more was possible yeah then I came
to get to full kind of Engagement of
fear as like oh everyone feels fear
that's like really normal that's really
human there's no way you will ever like
Escape that right but what you can
choose is how what you choose in the
face of fear and that is what virtue is
and like at the time I was reading a lot
of like great philosophy and stuff like
that and so I was like oh in fact I
think that yeah this came like I was
reading the dialogues of Plato and they
were talking about like the virtues and
courage and like all these things and I
was like oh okay like I'm a kid like I
haven't heard these things before I'm
like 19 I'm like this sounds good I like
this right and I was like okay so like
it's about having the moral courage to
do what you believe is right even when
you're afraid and then that became my
relationship to fear for a very long
time that that was uh my relationship to
fear uh I think until the time I got out
of prison uh and it like changed and it
had like its different manifestations
like there was a time like I was afraid
I'm running straight towards it right
which I don't advise right I just like
you know because this is and this is
less in the Realms of like surviving in
prisons and More in terms of like
personal relationships interpersonal
fears right like I'd be afraid so I
would just like dive into it right
and then like this is only recently like
my relationship to fear and like
emotions in general have changed and
that like at the time fear was still
like a bad thing right it was something
that I felt like was something that was
apart from me it was something that I
had to like conquer in some way and like
the first stage of my relationship with
it was like conquering it in the most
like irresponsible way possible uh and
like the idea of like courage was a way
of conquering it uh with something that
felt like integrity
but what I actually came to find that
like no no fear isn't something like
separate from me it's not my enemy right
it's like something I learned in somatic
therapy it was like the things that's
like the things that you do even the
things that kind of make you feel shame
whether it's like you know maybe you
have attachment issues and you fall in
love really easy uh and you feel ashamed
about that or maybe uh you don't let
people in and like so you're like you're
very caught like any number of like
habits that like we are working through
as we heal and tried to come and become
our best human beings something that I
learned a somatic therapy it's like look
the body is smart
think about where you learned that right
and then for me the conversation is all
often like in the context of prison like
let's be real about what that
environment is and in that environment
all these things that you're ashamed of
can't you see how smart actually your
body was like do you think you could
have survived that if your body didn't
develop these mechanisms if your body
didn't develop these habits so it's not
about like demonizing these parts of you
that you want to get rid of or feeling
like they're holding you back they've
actually saved your life right they've
off and they've actually made it
possible that so that you are a sane
human being that most people meet you
and they can't even tell you've been in
prison your friends tell you all the
time that like man sometimes I'm sorry I
have to actually remind myself of the
trauma you carry because it can you can
easily fool yourself into just thinking
Emil has it all together he's fine
because you present that well right and
that is part of the mechanisms that
you're body has created for you to
survive now let's honor that let's say
thank you now here's the thing about
bodies they tend to find something that
works and they use it for everything
right and so it's like you know maybe
you can just use this when you need it
and not use it when you don't
so that's the thing that you want to
learn in somatic therapy is like I want
a choice
about the mechanisms my body employs to
protect me not a default right and so
that began my relationship with
understanding fear as a part of me that
I get to love and have compassion for
and also collaborate with now fear isn't
something I overcome fear is actually a
road map for me fear is a signal that I
need to pay attention right now fear is
a signal that I'm avoiding something
right now and I may need to be careful
about how I approach it right that
doesn't mean like dive into it but it is
signaling something very important to my
growth in my spiritual journey that I
need to pay attention to
um and so now I use it like a road map
it's like oh I feel nervous about that
okay
what's going on with that what's what's
beneath that what's happening for you
what is it that's what is it that's
crying out to be healed in this moment
what is it that's crying out to be
taking taken care of in this moment yeah
I find in my own journey and in the
Journey of people that I get to witness
and experience is that if you're on a
quest for a deeper understanding or
Awakening or anything whatever words you
want to use for that that in even in
meditation if you're in like deep
meditation following the road map of
fear is one of the most direct lines to
finding the truth of Who You Are finding
the truth of your identity like I
remember at the beginning of my
meditations I would like not want to
feel the fear and so I was
meditating to manage that emotion by the
time I was finished
not well not that I'm ever finished but
the time that like where that Journey
ended for me of like of looking for
something that was me when that ended it
was I was just following fear it was
like the direct like going right into
the abyss every time and finding out
that that thing that I was most scared
of is actually where I find my deepest
truth so for me when I get fear when I
feel fear when fear moves I'm just like
you very excited like oh great there's
some good information here there's
something to pay attention to
exactly exactly there's something really
interesting that you said about about
not diving all the way into it and I
think there's times we're diving into it
it's great and there's also a way that
we can build an identity me speaking as
a base jumper here of diving into the
thing that's that's most scary and then
that can be something that becomes less
free where you know I see a bunch of
things in my life and one of the things
is the most scary and then I'm like well
that's the one that I gotta dive into
and there can be a way that I become
attached to being the identity that
dives into certain kinds of fears and
then I'm actually ignoring a whole bunch
of the rest of the fears and then I'm
like why do I keep recreating all these
worst case scenarios when I do all this
work on myself to accept the worst
possible outcome and it's like oh wait
I've actually done all the work to
accept that worst outcome and I haven't
accepted the subtle small fears of
actually taking any different path than
going into that one
like first of all like the human brain
and the body like like we are like some
brilliant creatures and there are ways
in which we can fool ourselves even by
doing the right thing because it's like
I'm doing the right thing right but
there's a way that we can focus so deep
on that that we can ignore all the
things that we're hiding from
that's awesome
all right well I don't even know where
we are anymore
I know I know I want the conversation to
keep going but I don't know where where
it's going well I mean we've talked
about like my three different
relationships to fear right and like
we've reached that third one of like
it's a road map like it's a it's a
partner in this life as our you know all
of our feelings and our emotions right
it's like they're Partners in this life
right that we walk with instead of
running from or running through or
pushing over or or hiding from it's just
like you know give all of your parts
that space that room to be and love them
right just like you know like you know
your parts are acting because they love
you right
um so love them right and also like you
know I have conversations with my body
my heart my mind my fears all the time
and it's like look man I want to name
that like you know I'm unhappy with
what's going on here but I love you and
like can you trust me can you trust me
to take care of this this is what I'm
gonna do when you trust me to take care
of it if you can't trust me that's good
we'll we'll work it out I still love you
right but can you give me a chance you'd
be surprised of like you know if people
might think like man that sounds pretty
crazy but you'll be surprised right
giving yourself the time of day giving
your feelings giving your body the time
of day to acknowledge and say that you
matter how much space that creates for
you to move through them I have a
question for you so I have a saying it
says joy is the matriarch of a family of
emotions and she won't come into a house
where her children aren't welcome and it
basically is saying yeah that is so good
that's a great reaction
and that's what I'm wondering if you can
relate to that like as you learn to love
all these parts of yourself do you find
your life becoming more joyful
absolutely I have I mean I've never I've
never thought about it I've never had it
phrased that way but it like perfectly
encapsulates but I feel like I'm trying
to do and what I'm discovering and like
as I discovered more and more Heights of
like peace and happiness even in
Conflict right like in the last couple
weeks like you know I've had like a lot
of conflict in my life and I have felt
very much at peace and very much like in
feeling like you know conflict usually
is a thing that makes me feel insecure
right you know I come from a place where
conflict often means death right so like
even small amounts of conflict have been
known to make me super anxious right to
make me unable to settle into my body
because it's just like I can't miss
anything and I gotta know everything
because if I don't I could be in danger
but I've been finding this place where
it's like I'm really at a much more
peace and conflict and I'm happy and I
have a a [__] ton of faith that this
conflict is only going to work towards
my growth and the growth of the people
I'm In conflict with and that is a
powerful source of Joy yeah right to
just be like
wow like I'm adulting I'm doing this
[__]
again I want to just say how similar
that is to a lot of the people that I
coach right these are high-powered
people in charge of billions of dollars
thousands of people and that whole idea
of like constantly having to track the
environment for the potential conflict
that's coming the anxiety that runs
their life looking for all the ways that
it could go wrong and their Journey from
that to oh I can I can trust myself and
I can trust that every adversity that
comes my way makes
me stronger and it and it's an
opportunity to be more connected with
myself and more connected with the
people around me more connected with the
my mission and what I want to do in the
world
and I mean that's the the same story for
the ones that are lucky enough to make
that Journey instead of just constantly
be in the fear and anxiety of the
Perpetual attacks of a of a capitalistic
you know system and a business system
I'm not saying it's bad or good for that
I'm just saying it's just the nature of
it it's competitive yeah yeah what a
pleasure what a pleasure oh my goodness
this is like what a absolute Delight of
my of my week thank you I'm so glad that
you spent time talking to us thank you
very much yeah thank you so much Emil
thank you man I was a little nervous
coming on because I was like you know I
looked at your podcast like this is kind
of a big deal right
and I felt like I thought you know I
talk to people all the time right like
I'm a public speaker I'm on panels like
I give talks I do workshops and I'm
never not nervous before and I'm okay
with that I feel like that's also part
of uh that's a different kind of fear
that I've actually developed like a kind
of pleasurable relationship to that's
just about like
being really high functioning right but
and not like hamstrung by fear but like
motivated by it letting it be your
aliveness yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah
in the Jewish tradition there I just
wanted to somewhat recently that they
don't have a word for fear they have two
words for fear and one word is kind of
means the fear of
existential life of like you're you're
threatened right and the other fear is
the fear of stepping into a room that's
bigger than you're used to it's like
being on stage it is growing into
something that you're being asked to
grow into or or to be the person you're
being asked to be that you haven't been
yet and they have different words for it
which I just think is I love that yeah I
think that's super useful because like I
mean
I haven't thought about fear in a long
time but I started thinking about it uh
for the show and I was thinking I was
like you know the fear that I'm talking
about like the one that I had different
relationships to I feel like there's
another brand of fear that's like kind
of different than that right and it's
like I'll end with a quick story and
this is the kind of fear it is and it's
not a fear I want to ever avoid this is
like clearly my friend and like is the
thing that keeps us like living at Keeps
Us Alive
um last year I drove across the country
and back and like uh I was coming back
and I was coming through the Rockies and
I was like driving through like my sixth
snowstorm in the Rockies which is pretty
and this is kind of an intense
experience
um and so like I'm like got my high
beams on uh I get out of the Rockies I'm
in Utah speed limit in Utah is like 80
miles an hour so I'm like 100 miles an
hour I think the speed is actually 90
miles an hour right but I'm like just
like I'm gone I'm like down the freeway
it's two o'clock in the morning there's
really no one on the freeway which is
why I forgot my high beams were on so
I'm driving down this kind of like Back
Road in Utah like 100 miles an hour like
a [__] Hyundai it's Honda Civic and
a head in the road is a boulder like
there's no Hills right so it's not like
it fell down a hill right maybe it fell
off a truck or there's some crazy ass
serial killer just putting boaters on
the road right but the boner's about as
high as my waist maybe a little lower
maybe my thighs right
and I barely see it right and I say that
to me that like if I hadn't forgotten
those high beams I'd I would have
certainly been dead because when I
swerved I barely missed it but I'm going
so fast that when I swerved like the car
is going out of control and like there's
no brakes at 90 miles an hour like you
might as you Kiss It Goodbye you decide
you're gonna try to hit breaks at 90
miles an hour right so I'm like turning
into it and I'm like fishtailing and I'm
in this complete Tail Spin and as all of
this is happening like I am feeling no
fear in the traditional sense that like
I'm not feeling that fear that felt like
paralyzing but I describe my
relationship to it right it's a very
different kind of fear because I'm
certainly like the more alert than I
have ever been in my life and I have
never
spot out before right but I'm
remembering everything I have ever heard
about spinning out and then number one
was don't hit the brakes number two was
turn into it right and I'm doing it like
and it's like a [__] movie almost
right and I am like working this car
this Honda and I'm like on this two-lane
Highway and I'm seeing the front and
flashes like
and every flash right I'm like taking a
snapshot and I'm like okay ahead of me
no lights okay I can survive this and
then I see that you're moving to the
left and you're moving off towards the
dirt and like this fence that's like a
cow pasture fence and I'm like okay if I
can stop on the road great if I can stop
in that dirt I'ma probably lose a tire
if I hit that fence this is done right
and so I bring the car to a stop still
on the asphalt facing the other way
smoke everywhere and then I stop then I
take a breath then it hits me like holy
[__] that just happened right
but I recognize the feeling of before it
happened it's the same feeling I've had
being shot at the same feeling I've had
with a gun in my face and having a gun
in my face certainly didn't mean that I
turned into Captain Commando I'm like oh
take the gun it's like no you're robbing
me I'm gonna give you this [__] right
but like there's this feeling there's
this state of intense awareness and
activity and if you decide to move you
move and it's like it's like the most
high performing that I have ever been
like in those situations and that's
actually not a fear that I've ever had a
problem with that's actually a fear
that's like it can only be defined as
fear but it's not that fear that I feel
like we've been talking about on the
show right right yeah that's that's the
same kind of fear in in a base jump
where something goes a little bit wrong
and all of a sudden you're just present
you're just there you're not thinking oh
no I don't want this fear to be
happening it's just you're just there
and you're you're acting and it's moving
through you and it's energizing and then
you know after you get out of the
situation and that's when
that's when like the next wave hits and
you're just like oh my God that just
happened oh holy [__] exactly
awesome well thank you thank you thank
you thank you for your time really
appreciate it yeah thank you so much
Emil all right man you guys take care
thanks for listening to the art of
accomplishment if you enjoyed what you
heard today please subscribe and rate US
on your podcast app we'd love your
feedback so feel free to send us
questions or comments you can reach out
to us join our newsletter or check out
our courses at Art of accomplishment.com
foreign
[Music]